everyone Lazlo Montgomery again partake
today of our China history podcast
history of tea series thanks again to
everyone who has made it this far at the
outset of this series we looked at the
second of the three sovereigns I won't
say his name you all know who shun Nong
is by now starting from around his time
in pre Bronze Age China the Middle
Kingdom had enjoyed a worldwide monopoly
on the growing processing and export of
tea thanks in part to their long and
continuous civilization the Chinese over
more than 40 centuries from 27:37 BCE
all the way up to and during the Ching
dynasty had gradually figured out almost
every conceivable way to eke out as much
goodness and pleasure as could be had
from this camellia sinensis plant China
acted as the fountainhead Oriental in
both the growing of tea and in the
development and refinement of tea
culture over the millennia hundreds and
hundreds of new cultivars had been
developed in all the tea growing regions
of China that used selective breeding or
hybridization when you read today that
there exists thousands of different
kinds of teas in the market it's from
this method that they all came about you
see that was the thing about tea or any
plant for that matter as long as the
growing conditions were suitable you
could grow tea as long as you had the
smarts and the technology to process the
tea leaves the only other thing you
needed were the right growing conditions
today
tea has grown in over 50 countries and
because of all the advances in
horticulture and plant genetics tea
plants thrive and places where it was
once unthinkable to grow and so our
story begins as early as 1788 Sir Joseph
Banks an English naturalist had been the
first to suggest quote we ought to look
at growing tea in India unquote that's
what this episode is all about
taking a plant from China and growing it
in India where the growing conditions
were also ideal but it wasn't enough
just to plant the seeds and start
growing tea it was slightly more
complicated than that planting and
harvesting the tea leaves was one thing
that was only the front end of the whole
process those who had the idea to create
an Indian tea industry knew the Indian
tea would have to taste just as good as
the China stuff that was the fundamental
problem as I said at the outset of the
series turning raw tea leaves into a
fine
tasting beverage wasn't an intuitive
process at all it had taken the Chinese
thousands of years of trial and error
and imagination to get it right
early on tea traders familiar with
bengal in northeast india wondered if
this could be done i mentioned last
episode that in 1823 the assam leaf
varietal of the camellia sinensis plant
had been found growing wild and thriving
in bengal this was Robert Bruce who
discovered what the local Indians
probably had known about since time
immemorial Robert Bruce another Scotsman
there sure are a lot of those guys in
our teas story Robert Bruce by the way
died before anything happened with his
chance discovery of indigenous tea
plants in Assam but his brother Charles
was there to pick up the ball and carry
it forward for this episode I am drawing
heavily on a book I cannot recommend
enough it's called for all the tea in
China
how English stole the world's favorite
drink and changed history it was written
by Sarah Rose the hardback Edition came
out in the US on Viking in 2010 followed
by the paperback published by Penguin
Books in 2011 I'll have a link to Sailor
Rose's book on my website today were
mainly going to look at the life of mr.
Robert fortune he was a Scotsman from
Berwickshire 50 miles east of Edinburgh
he was born either on June 24th or
September 16th in the year 1812 the time
of the joshing
in China fortunes period in China would
be spent mostly during the talk Wong and
Shen Fung eras after so many past
episodes we all know whenever we hear
the names of those two emperors it
always evokes the baddest of the bad old
days of Western imperialism and
domination in China you almost know in
advance whatever happens during those
two eras it doesn't end well for China
in looking at the history of tea like
we've done all these past episodes we've
seen how China led the world in not only
discovering tea but also figuring out
all the health benefits and best ways to
prepare it Japan Korea Tibet Southeast
Asia Central Asia and Beyond all embrace
this drink after Islam had taken hold in
Central Asia and of course in the Middle
East and North Africa adherents were no
longer allowed to engage in the daily
tipple but tea was there waiting in the
wings to act as a fine replacement to
wine and spirits I think I mentioned
last episode by the Ching dynasty all
the six main categories of tea had been
discovered white yellow green red along
and poo are mechanization had been able
to replace some of the handwork but
Chinese teas were still mainly a
handmade industry tea was by then well
on its way to becoming the world's
second most consumed substance after
water I mentioned last episode how cha
Joo for tea ware and the chain became
more beautiful fanciful and at the high
end more spectacular I was in Guangzhou
last week and spent some time in the
Guangdong museum there and saw fantastic
exhibit on guan's high porcelain Gwang
tae is the abbreviated term of this
colorful hand-painted porcelain that was
the specialty of the Guangzhou area
foreigners just clamored for this stuff
these hand painted designs incorporated
both Western and Chinese themes a lot of
gwanghae was made to order
specifically for importers in Europe
gone was the simplicity and subtlety of
past ceramic styles Huang Tai was
perhaps the kind of porcelain which
you've all seen before that was both
colorful and decorated with gold leaf
inspired by the ceramic treasures coming
out of this period in the Ching were
porcelain operations in England in towns
like Chelsea beau Darby and perhaps most
famously in stoke-on-trent go potters
some people of substance and power back
in London after watching the global tea
business grow from nothing and 1610
began to feel this business was much too
big to leave in the hands of one
monopolistic and increasingly unstable
and unreliable trade partner ie
China but after all these years still no
one had figured out how to correctly
grow the tea pick the tea and most
important of all how to process the tea
only in China did they know how to do
this and the Chinese guarded the process
well he was always grown in remote and
usually mountainous areas because of the
homogenous Han Chinese population if any
non Chinese especially a westerner was
seen walking around those parts they
stuck out like a sore thumb
so waltzing into the ouya mountains and
poking your nose around to observe and
steal all the secrets of processing tea
wasn't so easy to do but in the first
decades of the 19th century the tea
powers in the East India Company more
and more felt it was bad for business to
continue to be so beholden to a single
supplier China for the entirety of their
supply when the Treaty of Nanjing was
inked in 1842 there was still no place
else except China where quality product
could be shipped in the massive
quantities demanded by world markets and
the nagging suspicion now after
humiliating the Chinese nation so badly
with the Treaty of Nanjing was that
chyna out of spite or economic survival
would get into the opium business
themselves and that would spell the end
for the EEI seized opium export business
after all if the Chinese decided to grow
their own opium and supply the domestic
market themselves they could easily
undercut British opium from India and if
the EIC couldn't dump the opium in China
once again they'd be stuck paying silver
bullion for tea so it became more than a
feeling that something had to be done to
ameliorate this state of affairs when
Lin seshu burned all the opium back in
1839 its bucht everyone by the time of
the 1830s and 40s the EIC saw China's
continued tea monopoly as a clear and
present danger the tax revenues and
profits generated from the tea trade
were too critical to the British at all
costs a solution was needed to break
China's monopoly in 1830 the first tea
factory was set up in Java by the Dutch
to process all the tea that had been
planted there in 1826 these tea seeds
had come from Japan
the first Java teas to reach the markets
of Amsterdam will be in 1835 if the
Dutch can figure out a way the British
could - in the fall of 1842 right after
the Treaty of Nanjing was signed robert
fortune set sail for China he went on a
botanical mission sponsored by the Royal
Horticultural Society of London to
research the exotic flora of China for a
young man like fortune 30 years old I
was quite an appointment from such an
esteemed society
Robert fortune didn't come from money
rank or privilege so in order to get
such a plum high profile assignment as
this meant he had to be very good at his
job
fortune had worked his way up the ladder
in his field the hard way he started at
the bottom was good at what he did and
thankfully he got noticed this position
as the horticultural societies collector
in China came thanks to the Scottish
and botanist William McNabb if you
weren't from the privileged class
signing up for something like a
three-year mission to China was
something people of ambition did you
never knew what would come of it and
plenty of nobodies went on to make
something of their lives wandering out
to the hinterlands of the British Empire
you may recall with the Treaty of
Nanjing five new treaty ports had opened
to direct foreign trade the hated Canton
system was gone at last now for the
first time in Chinese history there were
a lot of foreigners wandering around
those places so bumping into foreigners
every day it wasn't common but you seen
them around that was one thing that had
changed the governor-general of India
from 1844 to 1848 was Henry Harding he
had said of China and the tea industry
quote edemen most desirable to afford
every encouragement to the cultivation
of tea in India in my opinion the latter
is likely in course of time to prove an
equally prolific and more safe source of
revenue to the state than now derived
from the monopoly on opium unquote
Harding had been an early proponent of
Indian tea and had even been the first
to send a tin of the stuff back to
England more and more the British
Colonials and tea barons began to look
in the direction of the Himalayas as far
as where the future of the tea trade was
Indian tea had been available in Britain
since the 1830s but the general
consensus was that while it wasn't bad
it also wasn't quite up to snuff for the
discerning British market maybe you can
liken this to when California wines
first entered the international market
it wasn't considered respectable or as
fine tasting as European wines
nobody was flocking to buy it the seeds
for this Himalayan tea had come from
China but they weren't the best seeds
and whatever they got was all they could
get their hands on they still had a long
way to go any farmer Monsanto executor
we'll tell you it's all on the seeds man
not all seeds are created equal but
despite the early dissatisfaction with
Indian tea governor-general Harding hung
in there as far as the potential went
let me quote from Sarah Rose as I'll do
throughout this episode here she is
quoting Henry Harding quote I consider
it highly probable that in the course of
a few years the cultivation of Himalayan
tea is likely to prove a highly valuable
source of revenue for the state no
apparent difficulties exist to the
spread of tea cultivation in the hills
to an almost unlimited extent and I have
every confidence that at no remote
period tea will be produced in
sufficient amount not only to meet the
probably large demand in India but also
in quantity and sufficient fineness and
quality to enable it to compete with the
tea of China in European markets and to
render England and some degree
independent of a foreign country for his
supplies of this necessity of life
unquote 1843 Robert fortune sailed into
hong kong harbor to begin his assignment
these were the earliest days of British
Hong Kong if you recall from those
history of Hong Kong episodes the word
on the street about the colony's
prospects as a trading entrepot were
mostly dismal from hong kong
fortunes sailed north up the coast of
china to shanghai to the mouth of the
Yangtze from their fortune began his
inaugural trip to China he was tasked to
keep his eyes open for anything of
horticultural value and to bring back as
many specimens as possible for further
study in London he was told to also look
for anything of value
concerning tea he found a lot of things
out but perhaps most important of all
was the knowledge that green tea and
black tea both came from the same exact
plant if I may I wanted to take a few
quotes from Robert fortunes book titled
three years wanderings in the northern
provinces of China now he didn't really
wander north of Shanghai so technically
his wanderings weren't
the northern provinces but he did get
around judge Jung Jung soo in Fujian and
well that counted for something this
book was published after his return to
England in 18-49 this trip made him
being quite a trained and disciplined
botanist and horticulturalist himself
the observations and notations fortune
made were astounding the book and his
whole adventure in China were a
sensation in their day let me quote from
fortunes book quote there are a few
subjects connected with the vegetable
kingdom which have attracted such a
large share of public notice as the tea
plant of China its cultivation on the
Chinese hills the particular species are
a variety which produced the black and
green teas of commerce and the method of
preparing the leaves have always been
objects of peculiar interest the
jealousy of the Chinese government in
former times prevented foreigners from
visiting any of the districts where tea
is cultivated and hence we find English
authors contradicting each other some
asserting that the black and green teas
are produced by the same variety and
that the difference in colour is the
result of a different mode of
preparation while others say that the
black teas are produced from the plants
called by botanist Tayyab oh hey and the
green from taya veritas both of which we
have had for many years in our gardens
in england unquote fortune had seen
first hand that quote the greater part
of the black and green teas which are
brought yearly from China to Europe and
America are obtained from the same
species or a variety namely from the tea
Avera dis great was my surprise to find
all the plants on the tea hills near Phu
Joe exactly the same as those in the
green tea districts of the north
although these specific differences of
the tea plants were well known to me I
was so much surprised and they may add
amused at this discovery that I procured
a set of specimens for the herbarium and
also dug up a living plant which I took
northward to judge Yong on comparing it
with those which grow on the green tea
hills no difference whatsoever was
observed unquote and with that the great
Swede
Linnaeus himself was proved wrong by
fortune regarding black and green tea
coming from two different species of a
tea plant fortune made some interesting
observations during his China journey
this book can be obtained online for
free I downloaded a PDF version for
myself I love to read these travel books
written by Westerners in the 17th 18th
and 19th centuries of their observations
in China I always get a kick out of them
fortune said of the first teas of the
season to be picked quote in the green
tea districts of Zhu Jian near Ningbo
the first crop of leaves has generally
gathered around the middle of April this
consists of the young leaf buds just as
they begin to unfold and forms a fine
and delicate kind of young heissen which
is held in high estimation by the
natives and is generally sent about in
small quantities as presents to their
friends
it is a scarce and expensive article and
the picking of the leaves in such a
young state does considerable injury to
the tea plantations the summer rains
however which fall copiously about this
season moisten the earth and air and if
the plants are young and vigorous they
soon push out fresh leaves unquote it
said that on this adventurous three-year
trip fortune acquired enough of a
proficiency and Mandarin so that if he
dressed up in a Chinese officials garb
if nobody got too close he could pass
for a local the real star of this
mission wasn't fortune as much as it was
dr. Nathaniel Bagshaw award 1791 1868 in
the mid 1830s Ward invented the
terrarium the airtight glass and wood
cases that could be used to transport
plant species that grew in almost any
climate over long distances up to this
time whenever plant hunters brought
cuttings and samples back to the home
country most everything died on the way
with these ward cases as they were
called as long as you didn't break the
seal and kept the interior environment
the same as when you first sealed it
that plant inside
would keep growing and thriving this
meant that the risk of hauling live tea
plants from China to India or for that
matter London would be no big deal as
far as the secrets to turning freshly
picked leaves into the finished product
fortune wrote quote the mode of
gathering and preparing the leaves of
the tea plants is extremely simple we
have so long accustomed to magnify and
mystify everything relating to the
Chinese that in all their arts and
manufacturers we expect to find some
peculiar and out-of-the-way practice
when the fact is that many operations in
China are more simple in their character
than in most other parts of the world to
rightly understand the process of
rolling and drying the leaves which I am
about to describe it must be borne in
mind that the grand object is to expel
the moisture and at the same time to
retain as much as possible of the
aromatic and other desirable secretions
of the species the system adopted to
attain this end is as simple as it is
efficacious unquote this book that
fortune wrote about all his wanderings
around this time 1843 1844 1845 really
is great reading from this initial
sojourn to China
fortune brought back invaluable
information that was used to make
advances not only in botany but in
commerce as well these chaps like Robert
fortune were the real indiana jones' of
their day they went out into the wild
mixed with the natives and carried out
these amazing adventures all for the
sake of science or some noble cause in
his book fortune describes all manners
of close calls that he had along the way
any one of them big enough to scuttle
the whole expedition but despite all the
hardships he managed to survive miss
Farr is disguising his appearance
wherever he went fortune wrote quote I
was of course traveling in the Chinese
costume my head was shaved I had a
splendid wig and tail I wish
some Chinamen in former days had
doubtless been extremely vain and upon
the whole I believe I made a pretty fair
although the Chinese
countenance and highs differ
considerably from those of a native of
Europe yet a traveller in the north has
a far greater chance of escaping
detection than in the south of China the
features of the northern natives
approaching more nearly to those of
Europeans than they do in the south and
the difference amongst themselves also
being greater unquote fortune got to see
firsthand how I was made the withering
the firing the drying everything and he
took meticulous notes and made drawings
of every step of the process many of the
great teas of the world achieved their
maximum greatness through the rolling
process this is what gives different
kinds of teas their unique appearance
and shape here fortune described what he
observed quote a quantity of leaves from
a sieve or basket are thrown into the
pans and turned over shaken up and kept
in motion by men and women stationed
there for this purpose the leaves are
immediately affected by the heat they
begin to crack and become quite moist
with the vapor or SAP which they give
out on the application of heat this part
of the process lasts about 5 minutes in
which time the leaves lose their
crispness and become soft and pliable
they are then taken out of the pans and
thrown upon a table the upper part of
which is made of split pieces of bamboo
three or four persons now surround the
table and the heap of tea leaves is
divided into as many parcels each
individual taking as many as he can hold
in his hands and the rolling process
commences I cannot give a better idea of
this operation than by comparing it to a
baker working and rolling his dough both
hands are used in the very same way the
object being to express the sap and
moisture and at the same time to twist
the leaves the leaves being pressed
twisted and curled do not occupy a
quarter of the space which they did
before the operation unquote when
fortune was finishing up this first
stint in China he had spent time in
Canton and wrote an entire chapter in
his book about all the teas for sale
there that ended up in Western markets
he mentions all the names you've heard
throughout this series Bo hey Congo su
Chun picot hisen gunpowder yung Hyson
fortune arrived back in England three
years after he left he brought with him
a portion of the more than 200 new
species of plants he would discover
during his illustrious career and his
final remarks in his book he had written
quote when we arrived at Hong Kong I
divided my collections and dispatched
eight glazed cases of the living plants
for England the duplicates of these and
many others I reserved to take under my
own care I went up to Canton and took my
passage for London and the ship John
Cooper 18 glazed cases filled with the
most beautiful plants of northern China
were placed upon the poop of the ship
and we sailed on the 22nd of December
after a long but favourable voyage we
anchored in the Thames on the 6th of May
1846 the plants arrived an excellent
order and were immediately conveyed to
the garden of the horticultural society
of Chiswick already many of those which
I first imported have found their way to
the principal gardens in Europe and at
the present time October 20 1846 the
anemone japonica is in full bloom in the
garden of the society at Chiswick as
luxurious and beautiful as it ever grew
and the graves of the Chinese near the
ramparts of Shanghai unquote so with the
proven success of utilizing Ward's cases
the high ups in the East India Company
inner circle knew that the wherewithal
finally existed to safely and
successfully get the tea seeds and live
tea plants out of China and shipped to
an Indian port from the Indian port the
cases would then have to be slept in one
piece up to the Himalayas to the
experimental tea gardens at Sahar on
poor and ultimately to Assam and
Darjeeling
the 1840s early efforts to successfully
grow tea in the Himalayas were coming
along quite nicely the EIC now had the
confidence to carry out what Sarah Rose
points out in her book was by our modern
definition a kind of corporate espionage
to quote from her book quote he met all
the definitions of intellectual property
it was a product of high commercial
value it was manufactured using a
formula and process unique to China
which China protected fiercely and it
gave China a vast advantage over its
competitors unquote so the EIC went to
robert fortune still basking in the
afterglow of his successful china
operation they made a deal with him they
paid him five times his current salary
plus transport to and from China they
approved all his reasonable expenses and
best of all as far as Robert fortune was
concerned anything else he picked up
along the way as far as new species of
plants including the seeds that belonged
to him the EIC didn't want it all the
honorable company wanted out of him were
live tea plants and enough tea seeds to
kick-start the whole Indian tea
operation if they were gonna scale this
tea venture in India they were gonna
need a lot of seeds over a hundred
thousand if they could get their hands
on that much another part of the EIC s
plan and filed procuring trained tea
masters from China to come to India to
consult to the British and Indian
planters there about all the fine points
to growing and processing the tea and
not only the tea experts were required
fortune was told to bring back any and
all tools and implements used in the
manufacturing of tea up to this point
governor-general Henry Harding had six
hundred acres of local tea under
cultivation in India that as I said show
promise but wasn't exportable quality
yet a lot of that was due to the
software they had the tea bushes which
was a start these were the Assam
varietal of the camellia sinensis tea
bush remember from tea part one you have
the
azam and java varietals of the Camellia
sinensis tea plant so 1848 rolls around
and fortune was successfully recruited
by the EIC to go in and do their dirty
work
Sarah Rose quoted the e a C's
instructions sent by letter to Fortune
quote besides the collection of tea
plants and seeds from the best
localities for transmission to India it
will be your duty to avail yourself of
every opportunity of acquiring
information as to the cultivation of the
tea plant and the manufacture of tea as
practiced by the Chinese and on all
other points with which it may be
desirable that those entrusted with the
superintendence of the tea nurseries in
India should be made acquainted unquote
can you imagine being a foreign national
on a mission like this getting caught
today you know in a Monsanto or Cargill
testing site with that letter on you I'd
hate to be the ambassador of that
country fortune very strongly believed
tea was a substance so important to
humankind that shouldn't be controlled
by a single supplier he went to his
grave believing he didn't do anything
wrong again he's lucky he didn't steal
these seeds and the intellectual
property from Monsanto he had to get as
many live plants as possible out of
there along with a huge quantity of
seeds just like that and while he was at
it he also had to procure sufficient tea
masters to bring all those brain cells
to India and show everybody how they
turned all those freshly picked leaves
into that magical cuppa that only they
knew how to do I'm sure
sufficient coin was offered to convince
these tea processing experts to take on
this consulting gig and sell out their
country everyone has their price I guess
by the fall of 1848 Robert fortune was
dressed up like a 1940's Hollywood movie
star portraying a Chinese character just
like last time he was in China if anyone
got too close they might mistake him for
a big nosed hairy foreigner wearing a
Chinese getup together with his a team
of servants and his trusty guide a local
from the
mountain area he took off first in the
direction of judge young and on way wuyi
shan would follow he already knew young
and the wan shan area of on way was
where the chinese grew all their best
green teas so getting lowdown about
everything there was to know about green
tea was his immediate mission last trip
fortune produced a bucketload of new
understanding now he was filling in all
the missing pieces he learned quickly
about the withering process that was so
critical to green tea he noted that as
soon as the tea leaves were plucked they
were taken to a central location and
spread out over these large Retin plates
and allowed to dry anywhere from one to
two hours fortune vividly described
everything he saw as the raw material
was passed from process to process since
green tea involved the least amount of
processing this was easier than when he
was trying to figure out the black tea
process he watched as the slightly
withered leaves were taken to a kind of
furnace room where batches of withered
leaves were put into a kind of wok at
just the right temperature
no thermostats back then and they were
still using wood fires the tea master
mixing the leaves and that heated wok
had to maintain that fire so as to heat
the wok to the optimum setting possible
if you're interested you could see how
they do this in any number of yoku and
youtube videos as they work their magic
you could hear the leaves sizzle and
crackle slightly as the moist part of
the leaf comes to the surface that's
where all the flavor was by the end of
this step the tea leaf will have been
reduced to 25% of its original size next
step was the rolling part there were so
many different ways to do this how the
loose leaf tea appears when you open up
that airtight package is determined
mostly by this process some tea leaves
are extremely small composed of buds
only how each particular village rolls
their tea after the first firing is all
is unique to them gunpowder tea for
example gets rolled into these little
pellets launching dragon well tea leaves
are pressed flat all teas have their
distinct look fortune noted a second
firing of the tea in these same walks as
he recorded his observations he was most
fortunate and met to provide color and
insight to every step of the process
he had the benefit of his trusty Chinese
aid to camp to confer with for any
questions he had fortune also wrote
about the tedious sorting process
actually saw this process with my own
eyes when I was out in Chile in Sichuan
I observed a bunch of workers all
sitting around a table filled with heaps
of finished tea
they spent all day their nimble fingers
separating the stems from the broken
leaves from the unbroken leaves the
unbroken leaves as you might imagine
cost the most and were the most prized
and whenever you see those perfect
unbroken leaves open up inside your guy
Wan or your glass tea cup they are a
most beautiful sight to see if you break
open your mass-market tea bag you'll see
there aren't any unbroken leaves in
there what you have is called CT CT
crush tear curl this process was
developed in the 1930s and within a few
decades was the standard mass production
method of producing tea destined for tea
bags when the dried leaf is processed
this way it produces a nice quick brew
of dark tea almost all the tea in India
more than 80% ends up as CT CT the
experts and tea snobs wouldn't be caught
dead drinking this stuff not all tea
bags use CT CT you can get high-end
loose leaf tea now in these nice-looking
pyramid-shaped tea bags robert fortune
made the rounds and recorded all his
observations i tell you both the Royal
Horticultural Society and the East India
Company sure picked the right person for
this job
not only was fortune a first-rate
botanist and
man of science he was an incredible
adventurer as well all you peeps living
out there in China surely can appreciate
how rough going it must have been for a
foreigner to get around there in the
late 1840s compared to today he faced a
lot of hardships and had plenty of close
calls but fortune was able to roll with
every punch thrown at him I have to say
this was quite a con job he did I can
hardly think of anything more
conspicuous than the spectacle it must
have been carrying all these ward cases
and supplies through the mountains and
villages and I'm sure some were fooled
by fortunes costume but surely most saw
something wasn't quite right about that
very strange-looking Chinese guy in the
sedan chair on this second visit to
China
Robert fortune is gonna stumble onto
something that later on is going to
provide a number of nails that will
close the coffin on China's tea export
business in his trek around
anway and Cho Chang especially around
Hangzhou he noted with some horror that
during one of the final processes the
Chinese workers were adding some sort of
blue-green pigment to the tea to give it
a particular coloring let me quote what
fortune said about this in his later
work the tea districts of China and
India he said quote having procured a
portion of Prussian blue he threw it
into a porcelain bowl not unlike a
chemists mortar and crushed it into a
very fine powder at the same time a
quantity of gypsum was produced and
burned in the charcoal first which were
then roasting the tea's the object of
this was to soften it in order that it
might be readily pounded into a very
fine powder in the same manner as the
Prussian blue had been the gypsum having
been taken out of the fire after a
certain time had elapsed readily
crumbled down and was reduced to a
powder in the mortar these two
substances having been thus prepared
were then mixed together in the
proportion of four parts of gypsum to
three parts of Prussian blue and formed
a light blue
powder which was then ready for use this
colouring matter was applied to the teas
during the process of roasting unquote
ain't that something incredible that
fortune stumbled on this Prussian blue
if you never heard of it before is a
pigment that's derived from hydrogen
cyanide if that gives you any hint about
whether or not it should be used as an
additive in the tea manufacturing
process fortune also wrote quote one day
an English gentleman in Shanghai
being in conversation with some Chinese
from the green tea country asked them
what reason they had for dyeing the tea
and whether it would not be better
without undergoing the process they
justly remarked that as foreigners
seemed to prefer having a mixture of
Prussian blue and gypsum with their tea
to make it look uniform and pretty and
as these ingredients were cheap enough
the Chinese had no objection to supply
them especially as such T's always
fetched a higher price unquote doing a
little arithmetic fortune had been able
to figure out that the typical green tea
drinker in the Americas or in England
had by this time consumed about half a
pound each of Prussian blue and gypsum
wait till that word gets out the next
stop for fortune was to woo Ishaan
arguably China's most celebrated area
for tea there he enjoyed the convenience
of shacking up at his aides residence
I'm not saying much about this local
guide surname Wang but he was quite an
interesting and conniving soul Sarah
Rose gives some nice descriptions about
this guy he was a tea producer himself
local to northern Fujian and was
invaluable to Robert fortune as a fixer
for everything he needed fortune set up
his operation at Wong's residence and
began at once
gathering plants and seeds this was
supposed to be a three-week operation at
most in the wee mountains
let me quote fortune as he beheld the
splendor of the wooly mountains quote
for some times past I had been as it
were amongst a sea of mountains but now
the famed Bo hey ranges lay before me
and all their grandeur with their tops
piercing through the lower clouds and
showing themselves far above them they
seemed to be broken up into a thousand
fragments some of which had the most
remarkable and striking outlines unquote
fortune observed an army of tea pickers
all women who worked these tea gardens
scattered all over the woolly mountain
area they worked sunup to sundown April
through October each tea bush will be
picked over every 10 days only the tea
leaves from the tips were plucked a good
picker he noted could pick 30,000 tea
shoots a day approximately 3,200 shoots
equal to pound they had amounted to
about 10 pounds a day per picker and a
four or five to one ratio of fresh
leaves to fully processed that wasn't a
lot of tea poor picker that's why you
had to have a lot of them named war how
about a sheer chairman mile once said
that and he sure was right in this
instance this was one of those things
the Chinese had figured out over the
centuries that by aggressively picking
the teas every 10 days like they did it
caused the bush as a self-defense
mechanism to use more sap into the
leaves there were temples scattered
everywhere throughout the woolly
mountains and the monks there were all
actively involved in the growing and
processing of tea after spending enough
time watching everything up close
fortune had what he had come to collect
he had this final observation to make
about tea quote it is an exceedingly
useful plant cultivated and the benefit
will be widely spread drink it and the
animal spirits will be lively and Claire
the chief rulers Dukes and nobility
esteem it the lower people the poor and
the beggarly will not be destitute of it
all use it daily and like it drinking it
tends to clear away all impurities
drives off drowsiness removes or
prevents head
and it is universally in high esteem
unquote by January 18-49 fortune was
pleased to inform the head office that
quote I have much pleasure in informing
you that I have procured a large supply
of seeds and young plants which I trust
will get safely to India
these were procured in different parts
of the country some from a celebrated
tea farm unquote I want to encourage
anyone interested in this story to read
Sarah Rose's book for all the tea in
China
I've only included a couple snippets
from this work in this episode and
hardly provided you with any detail I
assure you you'll enjoy a much more
satisfying meal reading this book it
really is an amazing story how this guy
pulled this whole thing off and for
further reading you go on google books
or if google services are by chance
blocked in your country try other
resources where you can download a copy
of Robert fortunes two books he goes
into minut detail about every turn of
events that happen during his China
trips I'll have links to everything on
my website next episode we're going to
pick up at the point where this tea
procured by fortune on this trip is
transported to India believe it or not
fortunes part of this black op was
mostly finished but there was still a
whole heck of a lot more to do before
they'd be packaging tea up in the Indian
Himalayas and shipping it to Europe
everyone involved in this risky endeavor
still had a very long and winding road
to hoe before the champagne corks could
be popped but fortune at least had done
his part everything the seeds the
seedlings plant cuttings all were packed
inside the airtight ward cases and
readied for transport once everything
was laden on board a cargo vessel in
Shanghai there was still a rather long
and uncertain voyage to Calcutta this is
still the mid nineteenth century and
these kind of voyages were still fraught
with all kinds of dangers that still
happened regularly on the high seas once
the vessel arrived in India there was
still
the logistical headache Oh schlepping
everything from the plains of Calcutta
to the foothills of the Himalayas
this was very fragile cargo packed
inside even more fragile glass cases
we'll look at how all this played out
next episode they had some close calls
so in part 9 we'll pick up where we left
off and what the profound after-effects
were on the British tea trade with China
the idea had all along been to steal the
secrets of tea from China and use the
stolen knowledge to build a new 10 the
street from the ground up and lands
where the British were in the driver's
seat then as far as the EIC was
concerned China could be as capricious
uncooperative and arbitrary as they
wanted
if Robert fortune and everyone else
involved in this operation did their job
well no one would need the Chinese
anymore so that's all for next time I
hope you'll come back and see how this
all pans out
to China history podcast history of tea
series is brought to you by the spirit
of tea a book and traveling exhibition
by tea lover and photographer Matthew
London the spirit of tea is a fresh look
into the ancient yet vibrant world of
Chinese tea culture through Matthew's
stunning photographs from an epic four
year journey throughout mainland China
Taiwan Hong Kong and Macau based on his
philosophy of the five elements of tea
along with masterpiece Chinese paintings
and poetry the spirit of tea takes you
deep into the heart of the birthplace of
tea and offers profound insight into the
essence and beauty of Chinese tea wisdom
Matthew London is giving away five
signed photographic prints from the
spirit of tea each episode head on over
to www.hsn.com is people in China
mate in Australia mr. James Dampier of
the Pleasanton informative Ozzie waves
podcast just came out with a new episode
that I want to encourage everyone to
listen to this time Jimmy as we know him
on our American shores introduces the
exciting story of Gough Whitlam 1971
visit to China and how this 21st Prime
Minister of Australia opened the door to
sino Australian relations both your
humble narrator and the entire
administrative and operations staff of
the CHP give this particular Aussie
waves podcast episode their highest
recommendations Australian history isn't
something to readily taught in the
American school system so I for one am
thankful that James Dampier brings us a
little bit of insight and understanding
about that great country and even
greater people one of these days I have
to quit talking about going there and
actually hop on a Qantas flight and head
down under I've been dreaming of going
there ever since those Paul Hogan
commercials in the early 80s that ran in
America when he was the face of
Australian Tourism and Foster's lager
compensated a mate with throw a shrimp
on the barbie that was a great ad
campaign so until next time may it not
be too long this is lszl Montgomery
signing off from sunny sanya hainan
province if I was any further south and
where I am right now I'd be in the South
China Sea we're so close to the finish
line here with this history of teas
series I better figure out what to do
next
I hope you enjoyed today's episode and
that you'll maybe consider joining me
next time for another exciting episode
of the China tea history podcast